Title: Are Newspapers Really Screwed?
Date: 2007-08-13 23:27
Author: gmwils
Category: business

[Alley Insider][] claims newspapers are screwed, and provides a
financial model to explain why. Using the New York Times as a case
study, their conclusion is that newspapers are making a loss on content
generation.

They make the extreme assumptions that print will disappear and that
online profits will grow modestly. The other areas of the business are
adjusted to compensate for the removal of print production.

The result? Losses. Massive losses. Revenue plummets from $789 to $285
million and profit is in the red by $64 million. This makes a fairly
good case for their argument that the cost of content generation is too
high.

However, the model omits some of the possible savings from removing
newsprint.

Newspapers typically include the following business units:

-   Editorial -- reporters, photographers, editors, layout, design, and
    imaging.
-   Advertising -- classified, ROP/display, sales staff, layout, design,
    and imaging.
-   Circulation -- how to get the paper distributed to subscribers,
    newsagents, and other places.
-   Production -- printing the content onto the actual paper and
    bundling it.
-   Other -- support staff such as HR, payroll, management, etc.

To cut out the print side of the business means much more substantial
savings in costs and staff than outlined by the article. In a web only
newspaper, the Circulation and Production departments can go. The
supporting staff can also be reduced, as the overall staffing will be
lower.

The Editorial team can shrink, both in size and cost per employee. For
examples, photographers don't need high resolution cameras as print
resolution isn't required. The imaging department can be simplified or
replaced by automated tools, as colour matching and image quality are
simpler for the web. Layout of stories is not required, so layout staff
can go. Web pages are uniquely designed, so the design staff can go.

The Advertising team can be significantly reduced. For a web only
publication, online ad booking would be the norm, so the call centre can
be mostly eliminated. The paginators (layout staff) aren't required for
web publishing, and the imaging and design departments can also be
shrunk or removed.

This leads to a much bigger cost cutting than proposed by the article.
I'd argue the the wages and salary cost, after staff reduction, is
slashed by 50-75%. The *Selling, General and Admin* costs could be
slashed by a similar amount.

Rather than the estimated losses of $64 million, the bigger staff
reductions by the move to web-only provides a profit somewhere between
$33 and $158 million. In other terms a profit of margin between 11% and
55%.

The amount of work involved in putting out a newspaper to print each day
is underestimated when compared to online publication. I do not see
newsprint dying off in the near future, and I will be surprised to see
it go in my lifetime. However, if newsprint were to disappear, newspaper
publishers could still be profitable content generators.

  [Alley Insider]: http://www.alleyinsider.com/2007/08/its-easy-to-say.html
