Title: Canon 1D Mark III
Date: 2007-12-16 00:07
Author: gmwils
Category: Photography

[![Canon][]][]

I was lucky enough to have a Canon 1D mkIII on loan to play with for a
few weeks, along with the wireless kit and a 24-70mm f2.8. The purpose
of the loan was to demonstrate it to a customer of ours. To do that, I
spent some time with the camera. These are my impressions.

</p>

It is rather heavy. Compared to my 350d, it is actually *very* heavy.
Add on the 24-70mm lens, a 580ex flash, the wireless kit and you start
to feel like a serious photographer. The sort that would go chasing
celebs around for fun.

</p>

The downside to all that seriousness is my 50mm f1.8 looks
[ridiculous][] on it.

</p>

The speed of this camera is just brilliant. If I was shooting sports I'd
be incredibly excited by it. Add in the low noise and high iso and
you'll find yourself getting shots you wouldn't have before. The live
view is fun to play with, but unless you're doing lots of studio or
product work, I'm not that sold on it. The viewfinder is so crisp, I was
more than happy to use that.

</p>

The wireless kit is something of a strange beast. If you *need*
wireless, then it has enough features to suit most needs. It can FTP to
a server, or shoot to a USB hard drive, or allow remote shooting with
live view over wireless, or act as a web server with camera controls
active from a browser.

</p>

Enabling wireless tended to make the camera a bit flakey during the
configuration process. It was usually okay once things were working. For
the purposes of our demonstration, it worked flawlessly. Using the
camera in the audience to shoot pictures that turned up on the main
projector added a touch of immediacy and wow.

</p>

The bit that kills me is the price. The wireless adaptor just isn't that
cheap for what it is. It is a feature you would really need to have to
justify the expenditure. And I'm not so sure you'd really need it.
Again, product photographers or studio photographers seem to be the main
purpose. Showing off at tradeshows would be the other use. I'm still
hoping we can have one in the office for that.

</p>

I was sad to give it back, but ultimately it is too much camera for the
level I'm shooting at. The features I liked are available on the 40d, so
like the rest of the planet, I'm waiting for the next revision of the
5d. The full frame is going to work nicely with my [fisheye][] and the
reduced weight means it will spend more time at the snow.

</p>

[Photos][] from the 1D.

</p>

  [Canon]: http://farm3.static.flickr.com/2221/1851761255_977ba9cdd0_t.jpg
  [![Canon][]]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/97356053@N00/1851761255
    "View 'Canon' on Flickr.com"
  [ridiculous]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/syd/1934504412/
  [fisheye]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/gmwils/1417509172/
  [Photos]: http://flickr.com/photos/gmwils/tags/1dmkiii
