Title: Crossroads on Languages
Date: 2005-09-10 12:27
Author: gmwils
Category: python

Recently, I've been distracted by reading [Paul Graham's essays][] as a
result of a Tim Bray [posting][].

My interests have been serious piqued as a result of one of his themes
of using Lisp to write web applications. As a higher order language, the
theory is that programmers will be more productive and that given the
types of programmers who learn Lisp, you can attract better programmers.

It is a very interesting argument. Something that I've been giving lots
of thought. My interests at the moment are in learning to write native
Mac OS X applications. Python fell in my lap as an option mostly due to
my background in Miranda and then the more popular (and powerful,
useful, free) [Haskell][].

Part of my motivation behind learning Cocoa programming has been to
write a native application that talks to a web based back end. For some
tasks, I'm still not convinced that a web browser is the Right Thing,
regardless of how much AJAX code you put in place. This is why the Cocoa
apps I've been writing have typically avoided building their own data
layer. One is built on regular expressions and the other on Address Book
and iCal.

The bit I've been avoiding is writing the back end. Past experiences on
this have been in Perl, which is useful, but I just don't like. I'd
rather not have to put $ signs everywhere.

Python seems to have the clean aspect and enough libraries for doing
things so I'd been assuming that I'd use Python for the back end too.
However, most of my thinking in Python is really derived from my Haskell
days, so why not write the back end in Haskell?

I also may have been distracted somewhat by a few other developments
such as Ruby on Rails and Django, as even with a thick client in Cocoa
talking to a back end, in this day and age, an application really should
have a web based version too.

Investigation has also gone into using [XUL][] as it is both web based,
cross platform and somewhat richer than AJAX.

All in all, it is a happy time to be in where there is such a wide range
of equally valid choices. It now comes down to a question of tradeoffs.

  [Paul Graham's essays]: http://www.paulgraham.com/articles.html
  [posting]: http://www.tbray.org/ongoing/When/200x/2005/09/05/Inequality
  [Haskell]: http://www.haskell.org/
  [XUL]: http://www.mozilla.org/xpfe/xptoolkit/xulintro.html
