Title: Disruptive Changes
Date: 2006-03-22 11:21
Author: gmwils
Category: Musings

I recently joined a rather innovative gym. They don't have many weight
machines or bikes or walking contraptions, instead they have four large,
relatively empty rooms. For the use of this empty space, I happily pay
around $30 a week.

</p>

Conveniently located at the end of my street, the [Pure Health club][]
lured me in with a simple sign saying *Yoga*. They offer an all you can
eat range of classes, including Pilates, Yoga, Tai Chi and others. Given
that they haven't spent the money on machines I have no intention of
using, the weekly fee is more than reasonable.

</p>

The concept I noticed was how they simplified the stereotypical gym,
accessing a slightly different audience.

</p>

This is a process I've been paying attention to recently. Ponder
Google's successes: a simpler search, a simpler mail client. The pattern
is also being repeated in a number of *Web 2.0* companies. Everything
from simpler project management to simpler word processors.

</p>

By simplifying the offering a different set of values is emphasized,
potentially entering a new or larger market. This ends up being close to
the central thesis of [The Innovator's Dilemma][], a book I'm currently
reading. The author makes the case for disruptive changes causing
existing companies to fail - new companies access new markets and evolve
to take over the original core market. Examples range from disk drives
to earth movers.

</p>

I'm not sure the gym scenario counts as disruptive, but between the
simplification of complex offerings and disruptive changes there exist a
realm of possibilities for new companies.

</p>

Have you noticed anywhere else undergoing or needing disruptive change?

</p>

  [Pure Health club]: http://www.purehealthclubs.com.au/
  [The Innovator's Dilemma]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0060521996/ref=ase_pseudofish-20/103-7050426-4979828?s=books&v=glance&n=283155&tagActionCode=pseudofish-20
