Title: Learning Chinese - continued
Date: 2010-06-18 15:29
Author: gmwils
Category: chinese

Since my [last post][], I've spent a fair bit more time on improving my
Chinese. Some recent changes to my routine have improved the speed at
which I've been learning.

[![Great Wall at Badaling, China][]][]

### Lingt

I already use flash cards, but am now spending more time using
[Lingt.com][]. They run an online language learning program, that
includes audio and writing. My accuracy is improving on words I swore I
already knew, but turns out I didn't know that well.

The site also includes badges and incentives to keep you coming back
each day. They remember what you've been studying and only allow you to
study a certain amount each day, keeping your memory fresh. This is a
key part to their success. They'll replay words at the point where you
forget them, increasing the effectiveness of your time.

### Reading

This was so simple I couldn't believe it. To get good at reading
Chinese, start reading Chinese.

It has always been my goal to be able to read Chinese content on the
web. However, I had also believed that my Chinese wasn't yet good
enough.

Reading [Kat贸 Lomb][]'s [book][] was enlightening. She taught herself
more than 16 languages. In her [book][], she outlines her techniques.

The one that stood out for me was her dedication to reading material in
the desired language, well before you can fully understand it. Instead,
aim for getting the gist of it on the first read. Don't look up every
word in a dictionary, rather look up those that re-occur lots. Then
re-read the book.

For the past few months, I've been trying to read two books in Chinese.
I find both interesting and I'm learning a lot of Chinese as I go. It
doesn't (yet) feel like reading, but more like attempting a crossword
puzzle.

When I started, it would take me around half an hour to muddle through a
paragraph. Now, I can often get through between a half and a full page.

One caveat, you do need to allocate time to it. I aim for half an hour a
day. Kat贸 suggests that you should be spending at least 12 hours a week
on learning a new language.

[![Shopping, Chinatown, Singapore][]][]

### Talking

I read a great article recently on [learning Chinese][]. The interesting
part for me was to look at finding Chinese speakers who's English is
worse than my Chinese. This makes sense once you think about it; I just
hadn't thought about it.

I still have yet to action this particular plan, and am keeping it on my
todo list for now.

  [last post]: http://pseudofish.com/blog/2008/12/12/learning-chinese/
  [Great Wall at Badaling, China]: http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3225/3106536779_0df938e70f.jpg
  [![Great Wall at Badaling, China][]]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/gmwils/3106536779/
    "Great Wall at Badaling, China by gmwils, on Flickr"
  [Lingt.com]: http://lingt.com/refer/2091ae7a702db7b
  [Kat贸 Lomb]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kat贸_Lomb
  [book]: http://tesl-ej.org/ej45/fr1abs.html
  [Shopping, Chinatown, Singapore]: http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3376/3578792744_b7ed624268.jpg
  [![Shopping, Chinatown, Singapore][]]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/gmwils/3578792744/
    "Shopping, Chinatown, Singapore by gmwils, on Flickr"
  [learning Chinese]: http://www.sinosplice.com/life/archives/2007/05/13/how-i-learned-chinese-part-2
