Title: My Path to Economical Discovery
Date: 2006-12-05 23:55
Author: gmwils
Category: Musings

I'll be the first to admit, for the longest time, I couldn't tell the
difference between economics, accounting or anything else even vaguely
related to finances.

</p>

Several events led me to greater understanding. Firstly, was my day job.
Newspapers move around lots money as a side effect of the sale of
advertising. This needs to be accounted for, and so I ended up with my
head buried in concepts like Account Receivable and Invoicing.

</p>

The second event was a chance purchase of Joseph Stiglitz's
[Globalization][].

</p>

I grabbed the book on a whim at Hong Kong airport and started reading it
while waiting for the plane. Continued reading it on the plane,
succumbed to sleep and then finished it when I got home.

</p>

The content of the book in itself was interesting. Stiglitz is very
passionate about the potential for good in the interaction between the
IMF, the World Bank, WTO, and the countries they were designed to help.
It is an interesting introduction, from an insider, to these
institutions and their role in recent events.

</p>

More important to me, however, was the language and the *science* behind
his arguments. As an economist, his logic was founded in the concepts of
economics. For the first time, I saw economics as a science -- a science
that attempted to explain the world in which we live.

</p>

I've spent lots of time learning about physics to try develop an
understanding of the world, and it came up somewhat short for me -
although I did enjoy the maths. Economics attempts to explain human
interaction across two realms: [microeconomics][] and
[macroeconomics][].

</p>

Microeconomics attempts to explain the day to day activities of
consumers and markets. Macroeconomics attempts to explain the
interactions of countries and governments, of interest rates and
unemployment.

</p>

With a taste of this body of knowledge, I was hooked. I wanted more.

</p>

Fortunately, a close friend of mine had majored in economics at
university, so I borrowed some of his text books. Very slow going, but
the language and theories of basic economics are slowly coming into
focus. The only downside is that basic economics isn't satisfying my
thirst for knowledge. The mathematics is simplistic and the assumptions
so broad that I question the rationale of the conclusions.

</p>

Definitely a reason to look deeper.

</p>

  [Globalization]: http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/asin/0393324397/ref=nosim/pseudofish-20
  [microeconomics]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microeconomics
  [macroeconomics]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macroeconomics
