Title: Phishing for a Holiday
Date: 2005-11-15 19:43
Author: gmwils
Category: Musings

In keeping with the interruption theme, I was interrupted by a phone
call from an Indian woman telling me in a toneless voice that I should
be excited as I had just won a holiday.

</p>

And not just any holiday, I have won five nights accommodation for two
to a three or four star hotel of my choice anywhere within Australia. If
I am prepared to provide contact details of additional people, I can get
an extra two nights, absolutely free. Was I excited?

</p>

Not really.

</p>

I travel an awful lot for work, so staying in Australia for a holiday
doesn't appeal to me. I am also single, so the twin share thing doesn't
interest me either. I have recently booked to go snowboarding in Japan.
Much more interesting than a local trip. But if my Australian holiday is
free?

Curious as to whether I really wanted this, I pressed for more details.

</p>

Apparently, all I need to do to claim my prize is to pay a $99 booking
fee using my credit card. Alarm bells start ringing here. Someone I have
no previous dealings with wants my credit card details for a booking fee
for a holiday? Even if this is legit, it really smells bad.

</p>

Asking for more information was a difficult task, as the entire call was
scripted to the point that I wondered if I needed to speak to keep it
going.

</p>

With further questioning, I was provided with a web site as some level
of proof of the offer's legitimacy. Alas, the domain wasn't registered
yet. Not compelling evidence of a real company.

</p>

In the end, I graciously declined the offer as I am not prepare to pay
the booking fee. In theory, I will receive a call once I have a chance
to digest the wonderful offer I am passing up.

</p>

I wonder how many credit cards these guys have acquired using this scam?
Too many is the likely answer.

</p>

For now, I will wait with bated breath for my holiday.

</p>

