Title: Photo Editing Workflow
Date: 2009-02-19 15:52
Author: gmwils
Category: Photography

Pressing the shutter on the camera is the simple bit. Once the photo is
taken there are a large number of options around workflow. This is my
current process.

#### Transferring the Photos

The obvious way to get photos from the camera to the computer is via USB
cable. I don't like doing this for a few reasons. One is that it drains
the camera battery, the other is that it can be slow.

I use a card reader to mount the memory card on my computer and then use
[Lightroom][] (LR) to copy the files across.

Depending on my camera or the shoot, I may assign a pre-set on import.
This matters more on my Point & Shoot (P&S) cameras, as the default
processing is fairly bleh. Adobe's defaults for my Canon SLRs is usually
pretty good as a starting point. I also have a metadata pre-set that
assigns various contact & copyright information to the image. I add
additional metadata, such as keywords, as I import.

With folder structures, I've been through a few. My current layout is to
place everything from one "Event" into a date prefixed folder. This can
be assigned in the Import dialog. For example, if I went to Banff, it
would be "2009-02-15 Banff". The date indicates when I off loaded the
photos, so the folder can span multiple days for an event. I can also
have multiple folders per day.

The advantage of this layout is that if I stop using Lightroom, I still
have a vague chance of figuring out where a particular photo is. When it
was just by date, there wasn't enough information in the file system to
be helpful.

#### Initial Edit

After LR has built the previews, and sometimes while it is, I will do an
initial edit. At this point, I'm viewing the photos for the first time
on a computer. If I consider an image acceptable, it gets one star ('1'
on the keyboard). If a photo is beyond usable, such as bad focus or lens
cap on, I'll set it as a reject ('x'). Depending on the shoot, I'll
delete the rejects from disk (Ctrl-Backspace / Cmd-Delete).
Occasionally, if I really like an image on first viewing, I will give it
two stars ('2').

From this point, I use the filtering in LR so that I will only see 1
star photos or higher ratings.

#### Second Edit

The second time through, I'm more critical of the photos. Each much be
interesting in its own right to receive two stars ('2'). While I'm
viewing the photos I'm in the Loupe view ('e'). I typically have LR
maximized ('f') and with the sidebars hidden (Shift-Tab). I also darken
the user interface. I set the dim level in preferences to 50% and use
this to hide most of the UI.

When there are several images that are very similar, such as in a
portrait or sports shoot, I'll use the compare ('c') mode so I can see
images side by side. Pressing the up key while in this mode promotes an
image to the left, while allowing you to continue through. Promoted
images will get two stars.

If I want to see more than two images at once, I use the survey view
('n') after selecting the images from the grid ('g').

#### Post Production

After filtering down to two star images, I start to consider candidates
for post-production. It is very rare that I'll output an image without
some level of post. Much of this I now do in LR.

Still with dim set, I switch to the Develop module ('d') and start
applying corrections in LR. This can include things like fine tuning
white balance, exposure, saturation, sharpening or applying subtle
vignettes. Much of this I save in pre-sets, so can apply with a single
click and preview before applying. Sometimes I use pre-sets from [other
sites][] to try out different looks.

If I have a series of similar photos, I'll use LR to adjust one of them
and then sync the settings to the other photos in the shoot. I do this
often to set the white balance from a gray card (or by eye) and then
make it the same for all the shots.

With the adjustment brush and gradient filter in LR2, there is much less
time I spend in Photoshop (PS). There are still some images that I'll
finish in PS. These are typically composites, or portraits that require
more retouching. I use LR to manage the PS files and to group the PS
file in a stack with the original image.

Once I finish in Photoshop, I'll occasionally re-adjust things further
in Lightroom. At this point, I consider the image done.

#### Final Edit & Presentation

Once post is complete I try to leave some time before doing a final
edit. At this point I've spent too long with the photos and am not very
objective. I find more clarity after a night's sleep. The images that
are in my mind when I wake are often the stand out ones. Editing right
away often means that the one I spent the most time on is foremost in my
mind, and may not be the best image.

In the final edit, I'll assign three star images ('3'). These are ones
that I consider the best of the shoot.

If I want to group images for export to a particular destination, I'll
use one of the colour labels ('6') or the Quick Collection ('b') to
select them. Then I can filter based on these properties and export to
external systems or print. Flickr, Gallery or Facebook all have plug-ins
for LR, so can be configured as export pre-sets. Make sure to set the
colour space to sRGB and set the appropriate size and sharpening for the
destination. Having the destination web site re-size and (not) sharpen
results in less great images.

I also have some pre-sets for exporting with the right file format and
colour space for the print labs.

Now that I have a photo printer at home, I will often print a proof
before sending to an external lab. This allows me to see what the photo
will look like printed. It is a different experience to hold the photo
in your hands than see it on the screen, and I'll often go back to post
and make changes.

#### Archival

Up until this point, the workflow has been carried out on one of my
laptops. I have two copies of the image (one on the card, one on the
computer). As I use the camera to format the cards prior to shooting,
this gives me some redundancy. However, the images need to be archived.

This is an area that I can improve. My simple strategy is to copy across
to an external USB mounted hard drive. Ideally, I should backup to a
second hard drive and/or burn to DVD.

#### Future Usage

My pictures now are easy to find using Smart Collections. Any long term
projects that I'm working on get specific keywords assigned and turn up
in a specific Smart Collection that searches for the keyword and a
particular star rating. I also have some collections based on [year][],
so I can see how I'm progressing.

I can use search to locate images for particular projects, or select
images for trying out a new Photoshop [technique][].

Ever few months, I'll go back over my 3 star images to consider
candidates for 4 stars. The 4 star images are ones I would consider for
portfolio usage or fine art sale. To date, I have less than a handful of
5 star images. These are ones that I consider 'wow'.

My aim is to shoot more images that make it to 5 stars.

  [Lightroom]: http://www.adobe.com/products/photoshoplightroom/
  [other sites]: http://www.lightroomkillertips.com/archives/presets/
  [year]: http://pseudofish.com/blog/2009/01/27/top-10-photos-of-2008/
  [technique]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/gmwils/3256933254/
