Title: Presentations as Conversation
Date: 2006-07-25 17:13
Author: gmwils
Category: musings

As a result of running through several PowerPoint presentations in the
last month, I discovered a positive effect from them. Even if we only
made it two slides through the presentation, it was enough to start a
conversation.

I am in the midst of visiting several of Trolltech's offices, meeting
some of our prospective customers, talking about Qtopia, and our
professional services. I'm relatively new to the company, so I am still
using presentations handed down from others. These do not conform to the
Presentation Zen school of thought, and can be rather dry.

My concern was that by showing the presentations, we would be wasting
time, and even putting people to sleep. As a consultant, starting a
discussion is more important than purely presenting. The risk of running
a presentation is that people turn their minds off and simply follow
what is being simplified through PowerPoint (well, OpenOffice's
Impress).

What I found is that the act of presenting can assist in starting a
conversation, rather than kill it off. The act of presenting set clear
roles for the people in the room (usually 5-10). This tended to
encourage discussion, with the slides acting as markers for the topics
to be discussed. Part of this is timing - knowing when to use a
presentation, and part of it is style - allowing participants to feel
involved and to feel safe in asking questions.

In one particular case, we were getting no where, started a
presentation, made it two slides in, and had enough to talk about to
cover two hours of sharing between all involved.

My previous skepticism about having some presentations as a back up is
evaporating. My aim will be an initial conversational style, but it is
useful to have another way to get everyone talking.
